I was tasked to build an application in college, which got me thinking a lot about what "good design" is. While researching good design practices I came across a topic I found quite interesting, application design for low-literacy users, and wrote a literature review on it. I thought I'd post it here, as it's of no use to anyone sitting on my Google Drive!


# Design Practices for Low-Literacy Users
## A Brief Review of Literature


The purpose of this literature review is to assess methods for designing interactive interfaces for low-literate, semi-literate and illiterate users. With the ever growing mobile phone industry, it is important to look at the demographic for applications. Quite a large part of the demographic comes from developing countries such as India, the Philippines and South Africa. In developing countries, it is difficult for the less wealthy portion of the population to receive any extensive education. Therefore, much of the population of these developing countries is either semi-literate, or completely illiterate. The average literacy of an adult, aged fifteen and over, in a developing country in 2015, is approximately 47% (OECD n.d.). Thus, approximately 53% of the population in these countries, including Bangladesh, the Philippines and many areas in India, is illiterate. Indrani Medhi points out that there were over 4 billion phone users in 2009, and almost 60% of subscribers were from developing countries (Medhi et al. 2011). Since most of the operations in a typical mobile phone require a minimum level of literacy, it is interesting to know how these illiterate people manage to operate these phones. Ahmed points out in his research that understanding this usage pattern would help us design an effective user interface for these people (Ahmed et al. 2013). This short paper aims to determine which methods are most effective in designing user interfaces for low-literacy and possibly illiterate users. In order to ascertain a reliable conclusion, I will be reviewing as many articles, journals, book extracts and statistics as I can find on the subject matter.

 >"The burgeoning growth of using mobile phones in developing regions is often being considered as a prospective tool for exploiting technology for development" (Ahmed et al. 2013).

The biggest industry interested in appealing to the illiterate users of mobile phones in these developing countries is the banking industry. "There is great interest in delivering financial services to the 'unbanked' via mobile phone" (Medhi, Indrani, Gautama, et al. 2009). Many people who operate cash in the economy of these developing countries, are without a formal bank account, and are therefore "limited in their ability to take out loans, maintain savings, or make remote payments". If it were possible to enable these illiterate users to use mobile phones for these transactions, and to create and manage a formal bank account using mobile phones, many of these obstacles could be partially overcome (Porteous & Hazelhurst 2004). Research shows that non-literate populations avoid complex functions, and prefer to use their devices strictly for "synchronous voice communication" (Chipchase & Jan 2008). Therefore it could be difficult to convince these people to use their mobile phone for other services, namely: banking. Much of the research I have reviewed used mobile banking for the semi-literate and illiterate population of developing countries as the primary goal to achieve.

Firstly, it is important to understand the usage of mobile phones by the illiterate and semi-literate users in developing countries. Whereas in most areas in India and South Africa users almost exclusively used their mobile phones for receiving and making phone calls, in the Philippines, where phone calls are approximately seven times more expensive than texting, texting is, naturally, the preferred method of contact. This resulted in a slightly higher rate of semi-literate people in the Philippines as opposed to the other countries where research was conducted. Older people in all developing countries reviewed who were less literate tended to use their mobile phones only for voice calls, and performed no texting at all on their mobile phones. (Medhi et al. 2011). As previously stated, non-literate people are reluctant to use their mobile phones for more than voice calls, but why is that? In their research, Indrani Medhi and the others realised there was more than just a literacy barrier preventing users from using mobile phones for more than just voice communication. "Users required significant prompting, encouragement, and time to press any key as they were nervous that they might 'break' or 'spoil' the phone" (Medhi et al. 2011). The subjects tested had little or no experience using mobile phones, or modern technology of any standard. Medhi and the others provided no training for the subjects. Of the 90 subjects, 56 of the subjects were initially unable to understand or navigate hierarchical menus as they exist, "even for simple tasks such as calling back a number from which a missed call was received". In this experiment, 40 of the subjects were nonusers of mobile phones. It was discovered that 100% of these people were completely unable to navigate the menus, and only 16 of the remaining 50 subjects, who had previous experience using mobile phones, were able to successfully navigate the menus first time. Instead of using the call logs to call the number back, users all preferred to dial the number in manually each time. Medhi and the others realised that functions such as this, which were essentially hidden from view from these basic users, were too difficult to discover. Medhi therefore concluded that it is unwise to use hierarchical structures and the use of them should be kept to a minimum, or avoided where possible.

Due to the high rates of illiteracy in these developing countries, it would be wise for designers of a mobile interface not to rely on textual interface and to design the application perhaps with the option of using other means of interaction. Non-textual interfaces include using spoken dialog, a graphical User Interface or a live human operator. Medhi conducted an experiment on illiterate users from India, the Philippines and South Africa. The experiment was designed to test how difficult it was for illiterate users to use a simple banking application that uses a textual interface, then how difficult it was for them to use an interface using alternatives to the textual design. The study showed that non-literate subjects could not operate a textual user interface at all, and semi-literate users had great difficulty and could not complete the task without assistance. Using spoken dialog, the study showed that 72% of subjects finished that task, quickly and with less assistance than the others. Using a graphical UI, 100% of the subjects finished the task, but slowly and with more assistance. The study showed that using a live operator reduced the amount of errors significantly. "Where it is economical to do so, employing a live operator is preferable to text UIs for mobile data collection"(Medhi et al. 2011).

Medhi points out that users may have been less successful in navigating the menus using the voice UI than the graphical UI, but the "users were faster and more independent on the voice UI" (Medhi et al. 2011). Medhi attributes this to the fact that the users were less hesitant to provide spoken inputs than to provide typed inputs, and in contrast to the spoken dialog, the graphical UI required actual text input at stages, which could have caused anxiety for the novice users. For graphical user interfaces, research shows that using hand-drawn representations are better understood than photographs or icons (Medhi et al. 2007).

One study examined banking interfaces, not for mobile devices, but for automated teller machines (ATMs) (Thatcher et al. 2006). In this study, and similar studies, "groups showed a tendency to prefer icon-based alternative ATM interface over the alternatives" (Medhi, Indrani, Gautama, et al. 2009). These studies, including a trial by one large bank in India conducted by Indrani Medhi and Aishwarya Ratan, which created a prototype ATM for low-literacy users, showed that the low-literacy users tend to avoid the use of text altogether. It also showed that it is better to "loop voice instructions in simple, slow vernacular", "provide biometric authentication" and "use consistent visual queues" (Medhi, Indrani, Gautama, et al. 2009).

From the exercise conducted by Medhi, there were clear design recommendations derived. the first is that graphical cues should be provided, as 100% of the subjects were able to follow a graphical UI, with only a little assistance. The second is that wherever it is possible, voice annotation support should be provided. As illiterate users, they are much more familiar with vocal communication and therefore voice-based interfaces are much easier for them to understand. Following this, the third recommendation is that you should provide local language support, both in text and audio. This makes sense because, especially in rural areas where it is more likely for the user to be illiterate, users will find it far easier to use an application in their native language, as opposed to being forced to use a language they are not familiar with. Many applications force the user to use English, but in countries such as the Philippines, users from rural areas or users who may not be well educated may only speak Filipino and very little English. The fourth design recommendation is that designers should minimize the use of hierarchical structures. This is derived from the experiment conducted, where only 16 users, of 90 subjects tested, could successfully navigate the hierarchical structure, and those 16 users have all already had some experience using mobile phones. This shows that any user without having prior experience using a mobile device would have little chance of successfully navigating a hierarchical structure, and therefore the use of such should be minimized.

Medhi's studies showed that although almost entirely illiterate, most users were able to understand numerical text in all situations. Due to this, Medhi's fifth design recommendation is that designers should avoid the requirement of nonnumeric text input. Instead of usernames and passwords, perhaps require account numbers and PIN numbers, as it may be able to greatly increase the usability of an application. Using numerical text in situations where it suits, will also aid in making an application more available and usable to speakers of a foreign language. There are many more guidelines designed by Indrani Medhi to help designers make their applications available to illiterate and semi-literate users. Medhi's work is well recognised throughout the world as being a quality guideline for designing applications to appeal to those in developing countries and has awarded her with MIT Technology Review's Innovators Under 35 award for 2010. (Medhi et al. 2011; Medhi, Indrani, Gautama, et al. 2009)

From my reading of these articles, journals, book extracts and statistics, I can conclude that mobile interfaces in developing countries such as India, the Philippines, Bangladesh and South Africa are moving towards non-textual interfaces with good reason. This movement shows promise to bring developing countries more rapid development in terms of technology and the usability of technology in everyday life for the illiterate, semi-literate and those not savvy with current technology. Researchers such as Indrani Medhi, Toyama Kentaro and Jan Chipchase have made it abundantly clear that using graphical UIs, spoken dialog or a live human operator where possible, are the best options for developing a UI for illiterate and semi-literate users. Research by Indrani Medhi and Toyama Kentaro confirm that text-based user interfaces are very difficult to use accurately by semi-literate users and unusable by any means by illiterate users. Based on my reviewing of these articles, I strongly encourage developers who are considering making their application available to those in developing countries, to use design patterns that do not require text input or a textual interface. The most positive results came with the use of a live operator, with "99.5% accuracy for real-time transcription by an operator" (Medhi et al. 2011). Naturally, it is not always possible to have a live human operator, and therefore the most positive results for independent use came with the use of spoken dialog in the interface. Those who used a graphical user interface with a little assistance, all completed the task they were given. Perhaps it is best to consider a graphical interface with a spoken dialog as help, but it is ultimately up to the developer to decide. Hopefully this short review of literature on the subject matter has helped clarify the importance of making a user interface accessible to those who are illiterate or semi-literate, if the application will be available to developing countries.

### References:

[Ahmed, S.I., Maruf, Z. & Shion, G., 2013](http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2442882.2442930). Usage of the memory of mobile phones by illiterate people. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Symposium on Computing for Development - ACM DEV '13.

Chipchase, J. & Jan, C., 2008. Reducing Illiteracy as a Barrier to Mobile Communication. In Handbook of Mobile Communication Studies. pp. 79–90.

[Medhi, I., Indrani, M., Gautama, S.N.N., et al., 2009](http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1518701.1518970). A comparison of mobile money-transfer UIs for non-literate and semi-literate users. In Proceedings of the 27th international conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI 09.

Medhi, I. et al., 2011. Designing mobile interfaces for novice and low-literacy users. ACM transactions on computer-human interaction: a publication of the Association for Computing Machinery, 18(1), pp.1–28.

Medhi, I., Indrani, M., Aishwarya, R., et al., 2009. Mobile-Banking Adoption and Usage by Low-Literate, Low-Income Users in the Developing World. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science. pp. 485–494.

Medhi, I. et al., 2007. Optimal audio-visual representations for illiterate users of computers. In Proceedings of the 16th international conference on World Wide Web - WWW '07. Available at: <http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1242572.1242690>.

[OECD, UIS Statistics.](http://data.uis.unesco.org/) [Accessed December 2, 2015].

Porteous, D. & Hazelhurst, E., 2004. Banking on Change: Democratising Finance in South Africa 1994-2004, Juta and Company Ltd.

Thatcher, A., Mahlangu, S. & Zimmerman, C., 2006. Accessibility of ATMS for the functionally illiterate through icon-based interfaces. Behaviour & information technology, 25(1), pp.65–81.
